# Background

## Education
I graduated from [Harvey Mudd College](https://www.hmc.edu/) in 2015 with a B.S. in Engineering. Harvey Mudd's engineering degree is a general one, covering everything from mechanical to electrical to materials engineering. This allowed me to build a broad knowledge base across different disciplines. While there, I was inducted into [Tau Beta Pi](http://tbp.org/home.cfm), the national engineering honor society, and earned a mark of High Distinction on my diploma.

## Professional Experience

### Formlabs: Print Process Engineer (2015 to Present)
Based in Somerville, MA, [Formlabs](https://formlabs.com/) designs professional-grade 3D printers. Unlike most 3D printers which extrude filament through a heated nozzle (fused deposition modeling or FDM), Formlabs printers use a laser to solidify either liquid resin, in an approach known as stereolithography (SLA), or nylon particles, in an approach known as selective laser sintering (SLS), into complex objects. These laser-based techniques can provide better surface finish, finer detail and superior mechanical properties compared to FDM. We were the first to bring stereolithography to the desktop with the Form 1, and its successor, the Form 2, has become the best-selling stereolithography printer of all time.

I work on the Print Process team, which operates at the intersection of hardware, software and materials. Our goal is to understand the inner workings of the printing process, from the path that the laser traces, to the curing reaction of the resin, to the motion of the printer's motors. Based on this knowledge, we then work to optimize the printer's capabilities by increasing quality, reliability and speed. Print Process is a highly interdisciplinary team; we collaborate with the mechanical engineers to inform and test new designs, coordinate with the software team to release updates that improve printer performance, and work alongside the materials team resolve issues with new resin formulations.

At various points in the product development cycle, Print Process takes on a number of different roles. During the early stages, we act as an R&D team, proposing and prototyping new printer technologies. I've done extensive testing on such prototypes to prove or disprove their viability as product. This includes designing experiments to uncover any fundamental flaws in the technology that would pose a risk to further development. Later, once the basic design of the printer has been decided, the team works on integrating the printer's many subsystems, such as heating and resin management. I've contributed both to selecting the hardware for these subsystems and writing software to interface with them. I then tested them, both individually and together, to make sure they functioned as intended.

Finally, as the printer approaches its ship date, the team carefully optimizes the printing operation to improve quality, reliability and speed. Since these refinements take the form of software updates, we can continue to make changes after the printer starts shipping, steadily improving the user experience of our customers over time. One of my accomplishments was to reduce the forces experienced by the part while it's printing. Minimizing these forces is important to improving both the surface quality of the printed parts and the reliability of the machine. I first explored a wide array of potential solutions and then iteratively optimized the most promising one. With this approach, I was able to reduce forces by 20 to 35%, depending on geometry. This improvement was then deployed in a software update to all our existing users.
